# notes-2024-01-31

## Finite State Machine
Can define languages.


### FA with output
1. Moore Machine
2. Mealy Machine

## FA without output
1. DFA (Deterministic Finite Automata)
2. NFA (Non-Deterministic Finite Automata)
3. ε-NFA (Epsilon Non-Deterministic Automata)


### DFA - Deterministic Finite Automata
* Simplest model of computation.
* Very limited memory.

Transitions are based on input, which is denoted on the edges.
Defined using 5-tuple (Q, Σ, q0, F, δ)
Q = Set of all states
Σ = Possible inputs
q0 = Initial state (starting state)
F = Set of final states (accepting states)
δ = Transition function from QxΣ -> Q

Any list of inputs that end in a final state is a valid string in the language.

If a disallowed input is given, that can cause a transition to a "dead state" which can never reach the accepting state.

By flipping which states are accepting and not, you get the "opposite language".
i.e A language whose words may not contain a certain string can be found by making one where all strings must contain
it and flipping the states.

### Regular Languages
A language is regular if and only if some Finite State Machine recognises it.
This happens when memory is not required.
Memory is required to store or count strings.

#### Operations on Regular Languages
* Union - A ∪ B = { x | x∈A or x∈B}
* Concatenation - A o B = { xy | x∈A and y∈B}
* Star  - A* = { x1x2x3...xk | k >= 0 and each xi∈A}

The union of regular languages is a regular language
The concatenation of regular languages is also a regular language.


### NFA - Non-Deterministic Finite Automata
* In NFA, given a state and input, there can be multiple next states.
* The next state could be chosen at random.
* All next states could be chosen in parallel.
* Epsilon-transitions are possible.

Defined using 5-tuple (Q, Σ, q0, F, δ)

All but the last are the same, as now
δ = Transition function from QxΣ -> 2^Q
